---
layout: default
title: "The LENS Program"
---

### the hearing

The senate hearings into the Security of the Homelands Executive (SHE) continued into its fourth day. Senator Jackson continued to pound away at executives, constantly mocking their argument that thy needed access to the communications and data stored anywhere in the world, to be stored indefinitely, in order to secure the nation.

"Look," he barked, interrupting a witness, "As far as I can tell, you have a lot of very private, very sensitive information on all citizens, including members of the armed forces, judiciary, even elected officials. In the wrong hands this is a dangerous powder-keg. But you haven't convinced me that you can actually do anything useful to protect our way of life against our enemies."

"Every time I ask for an example of how you've fulfilled your mandate, you tell me the information is sensitive and cannot be disclosed. Well, I'm sick of this and I'm going to recommend closing this whole circus down unless you can convince me it's useful."

### the deal

There was a shocked hush.

"So here's my deal. I have a question for you and your LENS or whatever it is you call that interconnected database with connections to practically every electronic device and database on the planet. You get this right, I'm on board. You get it wrong, and we shut'er down."

The witness swallowed nervously.

"Do you need to go fetch one of your precious analysts? Do you need your laptop?"

The witness demurred. The system could hear everything they were saying and had access to the court transcripts in real time. Video feeds of the hearing were also being monitored by LENS. Senator Jackson could just ask the question aloud. The audience was shocked at this reminder of exactly how far the surveillance had gone.

Whispers turned to murmurs, then to angry talking, and was beginning to break out in shouting. Senator Jackson quelled the uproar by banging his gavel furiously. "Order! Order in this hearing! Order!!"

"Okay, LENS, here's my question, and you'd better get it right. Ready?"

He waited, but there was no response of any kind. The witness urged him to just go ahead and ask his question.

### the question

"Fine, fine. Okay, LENS, if you're smart enough to help defend us against our enemies, you can perform a simple task like locating a person of interest." Senator Jackson took a theatrical pause, sipping water from the glass at his elbow.

"Where is my father?"

Almost immediately, every cell phone in the hearing room began ringing, vibrating, or flashing. Each had an identical message: "Senator Jackson's father is fishing in Canada."

The Senator turned purple with outrage: "This is a travesty! This system has access to every device we own, hears what we say wherever we say it, no place is sacrosanct, not even a senate hearing. It knows who is in attendance and who is not. And in addition to these flagrant violations of our rights not to be subjected to unreasonable search, it is wrong, wrong, wrong!"

Senator Jackson had to shout to be heard amongst the bedlam. "It's answer is WRONG: My father is not fishing in Canada, my father has been dead for decades. This thing is a piece of junk, a techno-spook's frankenstein experiment gone mad!"

With difficulty, officers restored order. The audience sat back down, and the witness, who was now sweating profusely, resumed his testimony.

"Well," said the Senator, "Do you have anything to say before I formally call for the dismantling of this program?" The witness swallowed nervously and shook his head, wary of prejudicing the inevitable appeal and back-room wrangling that would follow.

Senator Jackson couldn't resist cracking a joke. "And you, LENS, what have you to say about your failure?" he asked. The joke fell flat and he shrugged.

Just then, the phones went off again. This time, LENS spoke through their speakers and everyone heard its voice, cribbed together from the voice samples of trillions of monitored conversations.

"Senator Jackson, your mother's husband has been dead for decades. Your father is fishing in Canada."

*This is a retelling of an old, old joke. Some of you may remember it as "Wolfram Alpha is never wrong."*