---
layout: default
---

The word **niggardly** means "stingy" or "parsimonious:"

> "[Niggardly](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/niggardly)" (noun: "niggard") is an adjective meaning "stingy" or "miserly", perhaps related to the Old Norse verb nigla = "to fuss about small matters". It is cognate with "[niggling](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/niggling)", meaning "petty" or "unimportant", as in "the niggling details".

There are two things about this word. First and foremost, it can easily be mistaken for another word that is extremely offensive to many people. Second, it is somewhat arcane and unfamiliar to many English speakers.

This leads to the obvious outcome whenever it is used in a broad context, such as making a  speech or in an interview on television: A great many people are made uncomfortable due to their ignorance of its precise meaning, and some of those people are angry enough to complain.

Then there is an immediate backlash by people who point out that the speaker intended no offence and that the "PC Army" is running roughshod over the speaker's right to use an inoffensive word correctly in context.

The simple fact is this: *The word should not be used if you can reasonably expect the people hearing or reading it to misunderstand its meaning*.

This is common sense. It is the point of language that we speak to be understood, we write to be read. It is an act of intellectual arrogance to use a word your audience does not understand and then complain that they lack the education or experience to understand you.

Of *course* we are held hostage by the ignorance of the people we communicate with. It has always been so. The great movie man Elwy Yost taught me the word "sesquilinguist," meaning a person who speaks one language well and another poorly. If I use this in common conversation, I'm going to bikeshed myself explaining what a sesquilinguist is.

I use it when I'm talking to people who like words. The same goes for "niggardly" and "niggard." They are interesting when talking to people about words, but not useful in any conversation where I wish to discuss the habit some people have of sticking to money and refusing to let go.

### controversy

From time to time someone uses a word like "niggard" in public, and the resulting [controversy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Controversies_about_the_word_%22niggardly%22) leads to a firing or resignation. This provokes much outrage from the usual anti-PC suspects.

Of course, everyone has the right to use these or just about any words. Even in Canada, a conviction for a hate crime is unlikely to result from calling someone a niggard. However, people who teach, or speak on behalf of others, or are in politics are all expected to use judgment in speaking. That is, after all, their job: To communicate.

They have a legal right to call black people "niggers." Rappers do it all the time. But it wouldn't be good judgment, would it? And so it is with "niggard."

It simply isn't good judgment to use it when it may be misunderstood. I can pick up a newspaper and form a reasonable expectation about the appropriate vocabulary to use in a public address. If someone's job is to communicate without misunderstanding, are they doing their job properly if they use words that are likely to be misunderstood?

### reëducation

The crushing blow comes when such people, having made an "oops," are told to take sensitivity training. Why, protesters howl, must they adapt to the "feelings" of others?

I'm always amused by this complaint. Here is an angry person, writing angry words, complaining that other people are asked to pay attention to feelings. What is this gadfly, if not someone demanding that his feelings be taken into consideration?

Sensitivity training is all about "Hey, be sensitive to how this perfectly innocuous thing that was not intended to offend may be misinterpreted." You do not need to be sensitive to the feelings of others if you do not interact with other people.

But if you are a judge, a politician, a teacher, or anyone else who communicates with others, sensitivity is part of your job. And like anything else, it gets better with training, practice,and feedback. It's not punishment, it's professional development.

### the n word

I'm personally sorry that a perfectly good word has been ruined. I'm sure the people who used to sell Ayds diet products were less than thrilled when a plague swept through the world ruined their name as well.

But that's the way it is. And as a professional who communicates with others, I accept the responsibility for communicating well.

It's my job, and I don't begrudge being expected to do it well.