---
title: "Optimism and the Growth Mindset"
layout: default
tags: [noindex]
---

Last month, I had the honour of returning to [Nordic Ruby](http://www.nordicruby.org), where I gave a talk about "Optimism" ([slides](https://speakerdeck.com/raganwald/optimism), [source](https://github.com/raganwald/presentations/blob/master/optimism.md)):

<iframe width="600" height="337" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8xjntzo-mYc" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Nordic Ruby is a unique event. It is very much focused on the conference, not the talks. One of the organizers, CJ Kihlbom, claims that the talks are not the point, they exist as a catalyst for conversations, and it's the conversations that are the true value for attendees.

One of the most interesting follow-up conversations was about the relationship between Learned Optimism's Explanatory Theory and the Fixed vs. Growth Mindset Theory.

Or to put it another way, "Is Learned Optimism Considered Harmful?"

### Learned Optimism[^optimism]

[^optimism]: This may seem [familiar](http://braythwayt.com/homoiconic/2009/05/01/optimism.html)!

Dr. Martin Seligman wrote a book called "[Learned Optimism](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1400078393?ie=UTF8&amp;tag=raganwald001-20&amp;linkCode=as2&amp;camp=1789&amp;creative=390957&amp;creativeASIN=1400078393 "Amazon.com: Learned Optimism: How to Change Your Mind and Your Life: Martin E. P. Seligman: Books").[^simplify]

[^simplify]: I am going to simplify it down to a few points, but you should not judge a book solely by whether you like what I said about it. Read it for yourself and decide.

Dr. Seligman did some research on optimism and success. I want to emphasize the word **research**, because the plural of anecdote is not data. No matter how many nice people like me tell you something from our experience, it is not the same thing as what Dr. Seligman does to come up with this stuff.

Dr. Seligman's theory is all about how people explain things to themselves: We have patterns for our explanations, and that by testing our explanations, we can come up with a prediction for our behaviour.

Dr. Seligman gives us a test, he computes a number with the result, and he calls the resulting scalar "optimism," and he claims that people with high optimism are more successful and happier and whatever else that is nice than people with low optimism. And he thinks he has the numbers to prove it.

How does this test work? Dr. Seligman explains that when we make up an explanation for things, we have three fairly binary properties or axes of each explanation.

0. First, we decide something is *personal or impersonal*. Did this thing happen because of me? Or was it something external to me, like another person, or forces of the universe?
0. The second axis or binary property is *general vs. specific*. Is this thing affecting my whole life? Or is it just one very specific aspect of my experience?
0. The final axis is temporal. Are we explaining something as being *permanent*? Of having a lasting effect? Or do we explain it as being *temporary*? Of being a one-off?

When we explain something in our heads, our explanations have three properties that matter to whether we are optimistic or not: Whether we explain things in a personal or impersonal way, whether we explain things in a specific or general way, and whether we explain things in a permanent or temporary way.

### Pessimism and Optimism

Most people are consistent: Some tend to explain everything as being personal, some tend to explain everything as being impersonal. Some explain thing in a general way, some explain things in specifics. Some see permanent patterns in everything, some see things as a succession of individual, independent events.

Dr. Seligman's insight was that while this is true for many people, some people are asymmetric in an important way: They explain bad events in their lives as being personal, general, and permanent. While they explain good events as being impersonal, specific, and temporary.

Dr. Seligman calls such people *pessimists*.

Dr. Seligman's also identifies another group of people who have the opposite and equally important asymmetry: They explain good events in their lives as being personal, general, and permanent. And they explain bad events as being impersonal, specific, and temporary.

And Dr. Seligman calls such people *optimists*.

According to pessimists, all the bad things in their lives are everywhere, they follow pessimists around because they flow from the pessimists themselves. They last forever: The pessimist has always had these bad things happen, and always will. And they are about big, general things in the pessimist's life. Every small bad thing is just evidence of a greater problem.

Meanwhile, the good things that happen to pessimists are fleeting, they are narrow and specific, and reflect other people and other things, not the pessimists themselves. Pessimists underperform their potential, because they have no belief that they have any power to make good things happen, just bad things. Pessimists tend towards feeling *helpless*.[^helpless]

[^helpless]: Dr. Seligman is also responsible for groundbreaking (and controversial) research on Learned Helplessness.

Optimists explain good things as being personal, general, and permanent, and explain away bad things as being impersonal, specific, and temporary. They believe that they are responsible for the good things in their lives. That the god things are general, that each good event is evidence of a bigger positive phenomena, and that it is part of a long-running story. But the bad things are external, very specific, and happened just that one time.

Optimists operate with confidence that they can make good things happen, and this confidence flows from their asymmetrical way of explaining events to themselves.

### The Fixed and Growth Mindsets

Carol Dweck is the author of [Mindset](hhttps://www.amazon.com/Mindset-Psychology-Success-Carol-Dweck/dp/1400062756/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&qid=1158604938&ref_=pd_bbs_1&s=books&sr=8-1&linkCode=ll1&tag=raganwald001-20&linkId=b147c53eb5dcc8970ffdaab6b1433c93), an excellent book about what it takes to foster success.

Dweck explains that there are two mindsets: Fixed Mindset, and Growth Mindset. The fixed mindset is the belief that people have permanent and general traits—like intelligence—and that people's capabilities do not vary much, if at all. Activities like study and practise serve to reveal the amount of ability people have, not to change it.

The growth mindset is that people have capabilities, but they are more like skills. They improve with study and practise, and that while some people may improve more than others, we have very little ability to know any person's potential except through study and practise to see how things turn out.

Like Seligman, Dweck paid special attention to people who underperformed. What was blocking them from developing their potential? Dweck's insight was that people who have a strong fixed mindset and who feared they were poor performers in some area, had a very strong aversion to any activity in that area that might reveal them to be "losers." To them, there is an underlying, fixed reality of their abilities, and all we do in life is reveal it.

So when faced with a programming problem, a person who has a fixed mindset and who believes they are a poor programmer will give up easily. If they don't get it right away, well, they aren't good at this, and working on it won't make it any better, but it will tell them and everybody else how terrible they are.

Dweck studied successful people as well, especially children, and discovered that those with a growth mindset approached challenges as learning opportunities. They were not set back by initial difficulties. Dweck explains that their "growth" mindset gave them the confidence that they could and would improve their skills and overcome challenges.

Thus, Dweck's work provides a model for explaining failure and success in terms of a belief shaping whether people attempt to avoid or overcome challenges.

Like Seligman, Dweck also worked on discovering whether mindsets could be changed. Is the mindset itself a fixed trait? Just as Seligman discovered that pessimists could tech themselves to become optimists, Dweck discovered that people with a fixed mindset could teach themselves to have a growth mindset.

Unlike the work described in "Learned Optimism," Dweck also researched external influences on Mindset. She discovered that children are susceptible to the way that feedback is framed. When feedback on their behaviour or performance is framed in terms of a Fixed Mindset, they move towards having a fixed mindset themselves. When feedback on their behaviour or performance is framed in terms of a growth mindset, children move towards

### Optimism and the Growth Mindset

How do Seligman and Dweck's works fit together?

At first glance, they seem to be an uneasy fit. Attributing positive events to personal, general, and permanent causes sounds very much like the example of the "fixed mindset" of saying that a student gets good results because they are "smart."

However, attributing negative events to impersonal, specific, and temporary causes sounds very much like a "growth" mindset, a belief that failing something today does not mean that you are a failure overall, or that you will not succeed at this same thing tomorrow.

(*To be continued*)

---

### unfinished bits and bobs

But listen to successful people talking about their success, and you often hear things like:

> "It may seem like I'm good at writing, but the fact is, I revise and revise and revise every essay. If I was any good, I wouldn't need to keep fixing things."

> "I am a hard worker. I get up at 4:30, go for a run, and work until 8pm every day. I outwork my competition."

> "I have grit. I may not be talented, but I can sit in front of my computer and write every damn day, even if I don't feel like it."

These are examples of actual people I know who describe their success in personal, general, and permanent ways. But if you ask them, they will uniformly say that they do not have personal, general, and permanent talents that make them successful. In fact, they claim the opposite.

Let's take a closer look and see what's going on.

---

### have your say

---

This is published from a GitHub repository. You can [file an issue](https://github.com/raganwald/braythwayt.com/issues) to start a discussion, or even [edit this page](https://github.com/raganwald/braythwayt.com/edit/gh-pages/_posts/2016-07-09-the-optimism-mindeset.md) yourself.

---

### notes

---
