---
layout: default
title: What is being forced to do stuff against your will and judgement and moral values, if not "slavery?"
published: false
---

Pardon me while I pound my chest a little. I was reading about people asking Linus Torvalds if he'd every been asked to put a back door into Linux, and it seems he said the word "no" whilst vigorously nodding "yes."

Just so CSIS (that's the Canadian spook agency) knows, any time you need me in jail, there's no need for an extrordinary rendition or to cook up some nine-hour detention in an airport. Simply tell me that I'm compelled by law to decieve people. I must spy on a colleague or friendm, and you have a little letter saying that not only must I do it, but I can't tell anyone about it.

Off I go to jail happily, and you'll have to keep me there in solitary for a while because I will tell everyone just out of spite. You can tell me about my children growing up without a Dad, and I will think happily of them knowing their Daddy was prepared to make sacrifices so that they could grow up as free people.

You see, for me it's amazingly black and white. My ancestors came to Barbados as slaves. Some of you don't know what a slave is. A slave is someone who no longer has any free will because someone else threatens them with death, dismemberment, or some other punishment.

What is being forced to do stuff against your will and judgement and moral values, if not "slavery?"

I live in Canada. Many died fleeing slavery to come here to freedom. It would be an insult to their memory for me to do any less than trot off to solitary confinement where I'm refused visitors. You can't mumble about national security and "because terrorism" to me. The last round of slavery, the argument was "because God said so." Terrorism is a far less compelling argument than religion, and if they were wrong about God wanting them to own slaves, I'll bet that our governments are wrong, wrong, wrong about compelling citizens to do their dirty work in secret.

Canada and the US shares something important. The US was funded with a constitution because its "founding fathers" had experienced abuse of powers and didn't want their new country to ever do the same to its citizens. Canada didn't have a constitution for most of its life, and then one day Pierre Elliott Trudeau was asked if he really would call out the army to quell terrorism.

I don't mean security theatre terrorism--oh those naughty journalists publishing powerpoints!--I mean the real deal. Murdering people. Kidnapping people. Declarati0ns of war. Canada had a real, serious insurrection 43 years ago. The [Octiber Crisis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/October_Crisis) changed everything, because Trudeau's response was:

"Watch me."

And we did watch as he jailed and interrogated hundreds of people with little pretext and no legal recourse. We Canadians were very glad when the terorrists were caught, but our innocence was lost. We had become a country where the leader could just sweep up "the usual suspects."

We didn't like that, and I say with great pride that the generation before me responded by bringing in a constitution to guarantee it wouldn't happen again, no matter how bad things seemed in the moment. I don't know WTF our generation is doing